The exact number of nuclear weapons and ammunition that are currently in the world’s arsenals is not precisely known. Well-known, perhaps, only one figure. The total capacity of nuclear weapons now stands at 5,000 megatons - about 1 ton per person on Earth. "Nuclear suitcases" would not attract so much attention if it were not for the threat that they would fall into the hands of terrorists. And the likelihood of such a development can not be discounted. So, what is the mechanism of the underground production of this terrible weapon of the twentieth century? What are the options for its acquisition? And who today can boast of possessing a nuclear weapon?

How to make a bomb?

Although nuclear weapons are no more than an enemy’s “deterrence” mechanism, which hardly anyone would risk, today's rules of the game in the international arena are as follows: if you want to have influence in the major league, at the same time make it clear to “some” For countries that it’s better not to mess with you, you will need nuclear weapons. There are three main ways to get it.

The way "Just do it!". The most common opinion of experts is to make a nuclear bomb easier than many people think. Making a bomb is even easier than stealing a finished bomb. For the manufacture of a nuclear explosive device, you will need material that gives the explosive splitting of atoms, plus experts, equipment and means of delivery. So, the material - a nuclear device can also be built from materials not directly intended for this (so as not to disturb the "atomic experts" who are always ready to leave with the test) - highly enriched uranium in metallic form will do. Delivering a device to a target, by many calculations, is the simplest task. Experts make fun of the mythologized “briefcase with a bomb,” but seriously speak of a “bomb in a large cargo container” (the so-called “horse-bomb”, after the name of the standard steel cargo containers in which most goods are imported into the USA). In practice, less than 2% of containers open for inspection and most containers do not pass through x-ray detectors. So the chances to bring a suitcase are very high. The former chief of US nuclear arsenals, Eugene Habiger, states that "the United States is so far unable to defend against this." According to him, it is quite possible to deliver a nuclear device to Philadelphia, New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles and kill tens of thousands of people. Apparently, therefore, Habiger himself lives in San Antonio, far from the river transport routes.

In order to become an "expert" in the difficult task of producing a bomb, you will have to look into the library and pretty much climb on the world wide web. The basic methods of manufacturing an atomic bomb have been known for 50 years and the recipes are described in detail in numerous works on physics. The simplest way is to take a small part of the enriched uranium, the size of a small melon and shoot inside the barrel of a large cannon at another uranium "melon". Theodore Taylor, a nuclear physicist and the creator of both the largest and smallest American nuclear warheads, and now a staunch opponent of any nuclear devices, notes that the attentive reader can find enough information about the nuclear bomb in the publicly available encyclopedia - even the dimensions and working specifications.

However, the creation of a bomb is a risky gamble. David Albright, who worked as a UN weapons inspector in Iraq, notes that Saddam Hussein’s unsuccessful attempt to implement a nuclear weapons program in 1990 shows how one mistake leads to failure. Iraq received highly enriched uranium in a research reactor in an amount almost enough to build a nuclear bomb. However, the person responsible for casting, due to fear of spilling or contaminating uranium, decided to mix materials in small quantities. As a result, most of the uranium was still lost and the material obtained was not enough to create a nuclear bomb. Albright notes: "theoretically, it is possible to make a bomb, but good organizers are needed to carry out the whole process, and errors are possible."

A way to "borrow a half-finished product." There is, however, another way of manufacturing its own nuclear weapons: it can be produced from weapons-grade uranium or plutonium acquired in another country. In this case, the number of fissile materials required for each charge will be very small. In 2002, the UN proposed to adopt as the baseline the following quantities of fissile components of nuclear weapons: uranium-233 - one kilogram, uranium-235 - three kilograms and plutonium - one kilogram. This amount can be carried in an ordinary suitcase.

So, the task of manufacturing a nuclear weapon is greatly simplified. The time for its manufacture is also reduced. Pentagon experts call the dates: if there is uranium or plutonium with a degree of enrichment of less than 20%, the required period is about a year. If highly enriched plutonium or uranium in a metallic form is used, the production time of a nuclear weapon will be only 7-10 days. Also t